Intermittent heartbeat-only SSE frames then abrupt close; finalization event missing causing truncated responses after reconnect

Issue summary:
Customer sees intermittent SSE streams that send several consecutive keepalive/heartbeat events containing no tokens, then the connection is closed without the terminal/finalization event. After the client reconnects and attempts resume, the last portion of the response is missing (partial choice / sentence truncated) and there is no 'done' / terminal marker in the resumed stream.

Impact:
End users see truncated assistant replies in production workflows (estimated ~2-4% of streaming requests for this customer). Feature is user-facing (chat UI) and causing increased support tickets from the customer’s product team.

Environment:
- Customer: AcmeHealth (dedicated contract)
- Region: prod us-east (customer's dedicated pool)
- SDK: js-client v2.1.4 (custom reconnect logic)
- Edge: Fastly CDN + company reverse proxy in front of Redwood API
- Affected model: redwood-13b-v1

Steps to reproduce (observed by customer):
1) Open SSE stream for chat generation (stream=true) from browser behind their CDN/proxy.
2) Allow an artificially induced brief blip on the connection (TCP/HTTP/idle close or proxy restart) or wait for natural short disconnect.
3) Client receives several heartbeat events (data payloads with only meta/sequence info, no 'choice' tokens).
4) Connection terminates shortly after with no explicit terminal-final event.
5) Client reconnects and resume logic requests offset; resumed stream contains a partial last choice and never includes the finalization event, leaving the end of the assistant response missing.

Observed behavior (example SSE fragment captured by customer):
----begin-sse----
event: heartbeat
data: {"seq": 1024, "lat_ms": 12}

event: heartbeat
data: {"seq": 1025, "lat_ms": 9}

[connection close from client side / proxy reset]
----end-sse----

In a separate capture (server-side) we see a final token payload immediately followed by a heartbeat in the same TCP segment, but the client sees only the heartbeat and treats the packet as keepalive. There is no explicit 'event: done' observed by the client.

Expected behavior:
Finalization event or terminal token should be reliably delivered so clients can render completed responses and resume logic can produce a consistent finalization. Heartbeats should never mask or be coalesced in a way that hides terminal events.

Attachments and diagnostics provided by customer:
- pcap with two reproductions (attached to ticket)
- browser console logs showing SSE events (trimmed)
- sample trace to Grafana: https://grafana.redwood.local/d/stream/trace-123

2026-03-13 09:21 - Customer (AcmeHealth): We're seeing a handful of our chat messages arrive truncated for end users. We capture the SSE stream and only see heartbeats before the socket closes. Can you advise?
2026-03-13 10:05 - Support (Priya Nair): Thanks for the report. Can you attach the raw SSE capture and confirm whether you're proxying through Fastly / a customer edge? Also please include JS SDK version and whether you use custom reconnect logic.
2026-03-13 10:40 - Customer: Attached pcap and console logs. We do use Fastly and our own nginx reverse proxy. SDK v2.1.4. We attempted a client-side workaround to wait for a stray chunk but results are inconsistent.
2026-03-13 14:12 - Support (Priya Nair): Raising to Serving Runtime and SRE for proxy-coalescing hypothesis. Linking this ticket to previous heartbeat/resume issues for context.
2026-03-14 08:30 - SRE (Liam Chen): Initial triage: observed edge logs where small final message + heartbeat are written in the same backend write and Fastly/nginx coalesced segments downstream. Reproduced a similar pattern in staging when we enabled small-write coalescing. Preparing a minimal repro and spike to validate mitigation options.
2026-03-14 11:05 - Engineering (Marco Rossi): Hypothesis: proxy (Fastly) or Nagle-like coalescing reorders or masks the final token when combined with heartbeat due to missing clear double-CRLF separation between SSE events at the edge. We'll test two mitigations: 1) force newline padding between server writes, 2) send explicit 'event: done' as an independent write with TCP_NODELAY ensured.
Edge SRE reproduced scenario in staging by toggling Fastly small-write coalescing; final token can end up inline with heartbeat packet.
Server-side logs show final token emitted; client-side capture sometimes does not observe it when proxy coalesces and strips trailing separators.
JS SDK reconnect logic currently treats any subsequent immediate heartbeat after resume as a keepalive and may discard trailing payloads if not delimited by an extra blank line.
No evidence of model-level truncation; token stream on the serving-runtime includes finalization event in internal logs.
Related to but distinct from SUP-4721: that ticket focused on truncated final chunk after SSE resume from client refresh; this one reproduces behind edge coalescing in steady-state traffic.
Customer workaround: increase heartbeat interval on their proxy to reduce collision probability (temporary).
Customer workaround: add a 100ms client-side grace period after reconnect to allow stray final chunks to arrive and be appended rather than discarded.
Support suggested: temporarily disable Fastly buffering / small-write coalescing for the affected service.
Engineering to instrument server to emit terminal 'event: done' as a dedicated write and ensure explicit "\n\n" separator is present; PR planned: serving-runtime#812.
SRE to test Fastly config changes (disable small-write coalescing) in a canary and measure reduction in reproductions.
Support to coordinate with customer on enabling workaround and collect one additional pcap after change for verification.
Target: patch deployed to staging by 2026-03-18, production rollout contingent on canary results.