SAML role claim serialized as space-separated string causes RBAC parser to deny multi-role users

Issue summary:
After a recent upstream IdP configuration change, the SAML assertion's roles attribute is being emitted as a single space-separated string (e.g. "admin data_science") rather than the expected comma-separated list or repeated <Attribute> elements. Redwood's RBAC claim parser currently expects either an array or comma-separated values and does not split on spaces, so users with multiple roles fail to be assigned expected permissions and receive 403 when accessing the console or Model Observability dashboards.

Impact:
- A subset of users with multiple roles intermittently receive 403 during console actions that require role elevation (e.g., switching workspace, accessing dashboards).
- Affects both employee and contractor identities that came from the updated IdP connector.
- Blocking on-call workflows for analytics and on-call runbook access during engineer rotations.

Environment:
- Production (us-east)
- Affected apps: redwood-console (web), model-observability services behind the console SSO gateway

Steps to reproduce:
1) Use an Okta test account that has two roles assigned at the IdP level (e.g., admin and data_science).
2) Initiate SAML SSO to the Redwood console from Okta (IdP-initiated or SP-initiated SSO).
3) Observe the SAML assertion in the Auth service logs; confirm roles attribute serialized as a single space-separated string.
4) Attempt to perform an action that requires the second role (e.g., open Model Observability).
5) Observe 403 and no RBAC entries created for the second role in the session record.

Expected behavior:
- RBAC parser splits roles and binds both roles to the user session so permission checks succeed.

Actual behavior:
- Only the first token (before the first space) is picked up, or parsing fails entirely, resulting in missing permissions and 403 responses.

Workaround:
- Short-term: Create a temporary mapping in the Auth service claim-transformer to split roles on space for the affected user groups (manual fix).
- Longer-term: Coordinate with IdP team to restore comma-separated or repeated role attributes.
Create IdP user with two roles at Okta
Initiate SAML login to Redwood console
Capture SAML assertion in auth-service logs (trace=sampled)
Attempt to access Model Observability that requires second role
Observe 403 and check session.rbac entries
2026-03-10T14:12:02Z auth-service INFO incoming-saml assertion=... roles="admin data_science"
2026-03-10T14:12:02Z rbac ERROR parse-roles failed to split roles: unexpected-format
stack=org.redwood.auth.RBACParser:line 212
2026-03-10T14:12:03Z gateway WARN permission-check user=alice@redwood.com resource=/observability/overview result=403
Avery Chen (Reporter) - 2026-03-10: Raised after support on-call noticed multiple 403 reports during the 08:00 rotation. Collected sample SAML assertion and attached logs.
Samir Patel (Assignee) - 2026-03-11: Confirmed SAML roles string shows space-separated tokens for 7/12 samples. Added temporary claim-transformer rule to dev auth cluster for verification; test users now get both roles when routed through dev gateway.
Nadia Ortiz (Identity Team) - 2026-03-11: We rolled a connector update in Okta last night for attribute serialization. Investigating whether the change was intentional; can revert if needed. We will provide a change log by EOD.
Samir Patel - 2026-03-12: Mitigation plan: deploy claim-transformer change to prod auth-service behind a feature flag and coordinate with Identity to freeze connector changes until we ship parser fix. Monitoring 1 hour post-deploy.
Auth team reproduced parsing error in local with sample assertion containing 'admin data_science'.
RBACParser currently splits roles on ',' and checks for repeated Attribute elements; does not sanitize spaces. We can add .split(/[ ,]+/) in parser and add unit tests.
Temporary claim-transformer rule implemented in dev by Samir: roles = roles.replace(' ', ',') for affected group 'engineering-legacy'. Verified with 6 users.
Identity team indicates connector change was to normalize attribute formatting for some external partners; rollback possible but may impact partner integrations.
Security review: change to parser is low-risk but needs unit tests and regression checks to avoid mis-parsing roles containing spaces as part of a single role (rare).
In progress - feature-flagged parser change prepared (auth-service PR #4291). Short-term claim-transformer mitigation applied to affected groups in prod. Coordinating with Identity to either revert connector change or produce a stable attribute format. Post-deploy monitoring and a rollback plan exist. Follow-up: add robust unit tests for multiple role serializations and update SSO runbook.
PR ready: github.com/redwood-inference/auth-service/pull/4291 (parser: split on commas OR whitespace, add tests)
Mitigation applied: claim-transformer rule id=ct-20260311 active for groups: engineering-legacy, contractors-analytics
Post-deploy checks: 200/200 auth sessions for a 30m sample showed correct role binding after mitigation in canary cluster